DPLPMTU merge tweaks (#3702)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

QUIC depends upon a minimum IP packet size of at least 1280 bytes.  This is the
IPv6 minimum size {{?RFC8200}} and is also supported by most modern IPv4
networks.  Assuming the minimum IP header size, this results in a QUIC maximum
packet size of 1232 bytes for IPv6 and 1252 bytes for IPv4.

The QUIC maximum packet size is the largest size of QUIC packet that can be sent
across a network path using a single packet. Any maximum packet size larger than
1200 bytes can be discovered using Path Maximum Transmission Unit Discovery
(PMTUD; see {{pmtud}}) or Datagram Packetization Layer PMTU Discovery (DPLPMTUD;
see {{dplpmtud}}).

A client MUST expand the payload of all UDP datagrams carrying Initial packets
to at least the smallest allowed maximum packet size (1200 bytes) by adding
PADDING frames to the Initial packet or by coalescing the Initial packet; see
{{packet-coalesce}}.  Sending a UDP datagram of this size ensures that the
network path from the client to the server supports a reasonable Path Maximum
Transmission Unit (PMTU).  This also helps reduce the amplitude of amplification
attacks caused by server responses toward an unverified client address; see
{{address-validation}}.

> Enforcement of the max_udp_payload_size transport parameter

Reviewer: I'd move this paragraph above the one above, since they both talk about maximum packet size and in particular this paragraph uses "additional limit" which reads better one paragraph up.

{{packet-coalesce}}.  Sending a UDP datagram of this size ensures that the
network path from the client to the server supports a reasonable Path Maximum
Transmission Unit (PMTU).  This also helps reduce the amplitude of amplification
attacks caused by server responses toward an unverified client address; see
{{address-validation}}.

> Datagrams containing Initial packets MAY exceed 1200 bytes if the client

Reviewer 2: Needs to be 1200B of payload? (We need to be careful about which layer these numbers are describing, since the datagram itself will be larger.

Author: I think we caught this in #3742.

believes that the network path and peer both support the size that it chooses.

UDP datagrams MUST NOT be fragmented at the IP layer.  In IPv4
{{!IPv4=RFC0791}}, the DF bit MUST be set to prevent fragmentation on the path.

A server MUST discard an Initial packet that is carried in a UDP datagram with a

> payload that is less than the smallest allowed maximum packet size  of 1200

Reviewer: ```suggestion
payload that is less than the smallest allowed maximum packet size of 1200
```

# Packet Size {#packet-size}

The QUIC packet size includes the QUIC header and protected payload, but not the
UDP or IP headers.

QUIC depends upon a minimum IP packet size of at least 1280 bytes.  This is the
IPv6 minimum size {{?RFC8200}} and is also supported by most modern IPv4
networks.  Assuming the minimum IP header size, this results in a QUIC maximum
packet size of 1232 bytes for IPv6 and 1252 bytes for IPv4.

The QUIC maximum packet size is the largest size of QUIC packet that can be sent
across a network path using a single packet. Any maximum packet size larger than

> 1200 bytes can be discovered using PMTUD/DPLPMTUD.

Reviewer 3: expand/cite for PMTUD/DPLPMTUD. I don't think it's been introduced before.

The QUIC packet size includes the QUIC header and protected payload, but not the
UDP or IP header.

> QUIC depends upon a minimum packet size of at least 1280 bytes.  This is the

Author: Good point.  That's been sitting there for ages and you are the first to notice.

over time.  The largest UDP payload an endpoint sends at any given time is
referred to as the endpoint's maximum packet size.

An endpoint SHOULD use Datagram Packetization Layer PMTU Discovery
({{!DPLPMTUD=I-D.ietf-tsvwg-datagram-plpmtud}}) or implement Path MTU Discovery

> (PMTUD) {{!RFC1191}} {{!RFC8201}} to determine whether the path to a destination

Reviewer 3: Move this above to where PMTUD and DPLPMTUD are used for the first time.

will support a desired message size without fragmentation.  In the absence of
these mechanisms, QUIC endpoints SHOULD NOT send IP packets larger than the
minimum QUIC packet size.

> Both PMTUD and DPLPMTUD send IP packets that are larger than the current maximum
> packet size.  Aside from these PMTU probe packets, all QUIC packets SHOULD be
> sized to fit within the maximum packet size to avoid the packet being fragmented
> or dropped {{?RFC8085}}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Both PMTUD and DPLPMTUD send IP packets that are larger than the current maximum
packet size.  We refer to these packets as PMTU probes. All QUIC packets that are not
in a PMTU probe SHOULD be sized to fit within the maximum packet size to avoid the
packet being fragmented or dropped {{?RFC8085}}.
```

If a QUIC endpoint determines that the PMTU between any pair of local and remote
IP addresses has fallen below the smallest allowed maximum packet size of 1200

> bytes, it MUST immediately cease sending QUIC packets, except for PMTU probe
> packets, on the affected path.  An endpoint MAY terminate the connection if an

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
bytes, it MUST immediately cease sending QUIC packets, except for those in PMTU
probes, on the affected path.  An endpoint MAY terminate the connection if an
```

over time.  The largest UDP payload an endpoint sends at any given time is
referred to as the endpoint's maximum packet size.

An endpoint SHOULD use DPLPMTUD ({{dplpmtud}}) or PMTUD ({{pmtud}}) to determine
whether the path to a destination will support a desired message size without
fragmentation.  In the absence of these mechanisms, QUIC endpoints SHOULD NOT

> send IP packets larger than the minimum QUIC packet size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
send IP packets larger than the smallest allowed maximum packet size.
```

Both DPLPMTUD and PMTUD send IP packets that are larger than the current maximum
packet size.  We refer to these as PMTU probes.  All QUIC packets that are not
sent in a PMTU probe SHOULD be sized to fit within the maximum packet size to
avoid the packet being fragmented or dropped {{?RFC8085}}.

If a QUIC endpoint determines that the PMTU between any pair of local and remote
IP addresses has fallen below the smallest allowed maximum packet size of 1200
bytes, it MUST immediately cease sending QUIC packets, except for those in PMTU

> probes, on the affected path.  An endpoint MAY terminate the connection if an

Reviewer: This isn't new text, but tt seems like these two statements may be contradictory?  Should this be "except for those in PMTU probes or containing connection close frames, on the affected path."?

6 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.  Any reduction in the QUIC maximum packet size in response
to ICMP messages MAY be provisional until QUIC's loss detection algorithm
determines that the quoted packet has actually been lost.

## Datagram Packetization Layer PMTU Discovery {#dplpmtud}

Datagram Packetization Layer PMTU Discovery (DPLPMTUD;
{{!DPLPMTUD=I-D.ietf-tsvwg-datagram-plpmtud}}) relies on tracking loss or
acknowledgment of QUIC packets that are carried in PMTU probes.  PMTU probes for
DPLPMTUD that use the PADDING frame implement "Probing using padding data", as
defined in Section 4.1 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.

Endpoints SHOULD set the initial value of BASE_PMTU (see Section 5.1 of
{{!DPLPMTUD}}) to be consistent with the minimum QUIC packet size. The
MIN_PLPMTU is the same as the BASE_PMTU.

QUIC endpoints implementing DPLPMTUD maintain a maximum packet size (DPLPMTUD
MPS) for each combination of local and remote IP addresses.

If a QUIC endpoint determines that the PLPMTU between any pair of local and
remote IP addresses has fallen below the size needed to support the minimum QUIC
packet size (BASE_PLPMTU), it MUST immediately cease sending QUIC packets on the

> affected path. An endpoint MAY terminate the connection if an alternative path

Reviewer: This seems a bit repetitive of 3862-3866.  It's also still confusing or potentially contradictory to me.

## Datagram Packetization Layer PMTU Discovery

When implementing the algorithm in Section 5 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}, the initial value
of BASE_PMTU SHOULD be consistent with the minimum QUIC packet size. The
MIN_PLPMTU is the same as the BASE_PMTU.

QUIC endpoints implementing DPLPMTUD maintain a maximum packet size (DPLPMTUD
MPS) for each combination of local and remote IP addresses.

If a QUIC endpoint determines that the PLPMTU between any pair of local and
remote IP addresses has fallen below the size needed to support the minimum QUIC
packet size (BASE_PLPMTU), it MUST immediately cease sending QUIC packets,
except for DPLPMTUD probe packets, on the affected path. An endpoint MAY
terminate the connection if an alternative path cannot be found.

### DPLPMTUD and Initial Connectivity

From the perspective of DPLPMTUD, QUIC transport is an acknowledged
packetization layer (PL). A sender can therefore enter the DPLPMTUD BASE state
when the QUIC connection handshake has been completed and the endpoint has

> established a 1-RTT key.

Author: Yep.  Missed that in my pass.  Corrected.

### Sending QUIC DPLPMTUD Probe Packets

DPLPMTU probe packets are ack-eliciting packets.  Probe packets that use the
PADDING frame therefore implement "Probing using padding data", as defined in
Section 4.1 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.  Endpoints could limit the content of probe

> packets to PING and PADDING frames as packets that are larger than the current

Author: The coalescing part sort of reveals a flaw in the construction though.  It shows that the probe really uses datagrams.  At this level, I think that assuming the hack (coalescing with junk Handshake) is not involved, is OK.  Happy to take suggestions though, because this is definitely awkward.

> packets to PING and PADDING frames as packets that are larger than the current

Reviewer 3: Yes, this was starting to leak badly. I think there's some cleaning up that needs to be done in terms of bringing consistency overall, see meta comment above.

maximum packet size are more likely to be dropped by the network.

DPLPMTU probe packets consume congestion window, which could delay subsequent
transmission by an application.

### Validating the QUIC Path with DPLPMTUD

QUIC provides an acknowledged PL, therefore a sender does not implement the
DPLPMTUD CONFIRMATION_TIMER while in the SEARCH_COMPLETE state.

### Handling of ICMP Messages by DPLPMTUD

An endpoint using DPLPMTUD requires the validation of any received PTB message
before using the PTB information, as defined in Section 4.6 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.
In addition to UDP Port validation, QUIC validates an ICMP message by using

> other PL information (e.g., validation of connection identifiers (CIDs) in the

Reviewer 2: I think /CID/ is already defined at this point in the ID.

Author: I don't think we use is, so thanks for drawing attention to it.  We use "connection ID" and so I have fixed this.

quoted packet of any received ICMP message).

The considerations for processing ICMP messages described in {{icmp-pmtud}} also
apply if these messages are used by DPLPMTUD.

## PMTUD/DPLPMTUD Probes Containing Source Connection ID {#pmtu-probes-src-cid}

Endpoints that rely on the destination connection ID for routing incoming QUIC
packets are likely to require that the connection ID be included in
PMTUD/DPLPMTUD probe packets to route any resulting ICMP messages
({{icmp-pmtud}}) back to the correct endpoint.  However, only long header
packets ({{long-header}}) contain source connection IDs, and long header packets
are not decrypted or acknowledged by the peer once the handshake is complete.

> One way to construct a PMTU probe is to coalesce (see {{packet-coalesce}}) a

Author: Yeah, this should be either.

packet with a long header, such as a Handshake or 0-RTT packet
({{long-header}}), with a short header packet in a single UDP datagram.  If the
UDP datagram reaches the endpoint, the packet with the long header will be
ignored, but the short header packet will be acknowledged.  If the UDP datagram
causes an ICMP message to be sent, the first part of the datagram will be quoted

> in that message.  If the source connection ID is within the quoted portion of

Reviewer 2: I think these may already be defined, you could use them if toy prefer: /CID/ or /SCID/.

the UDP datagram, that could be used for routing.

> 

Reviewer 2: used for routing ... add: /and for validation of an ICMP message./

Author: Good point.  And it is either.  (Though using other junk in the packet might be better for validation, if the quoted part is indeed long enough.  One real concern with this hack is that the router might not quote enough of the packet include the the whole Source Connection ID field, especially if the Destination Connection ID - which you can't truncate either - has to be longer.)

Reviewer 2: :-). (Knowing that needs a measurement survey) However, the implications are you wouldn't be able to rely on ICMP to help you. Well that's no new news there are many reasons why you may not see a PTB message, that's why DPLPMTUD was made.

Note:
: The purpose of using a packet with a long header is only to ensure that the

>   quoted packet contained in the ICMP message contains a Source Connection ID

Reviewer 2: /SCID/ may already be defined if you prefer.

Author: We've taken to writing these out in full.

Reviewer 2: :-)

>   field that can be use for routing.  This packet does not need to be a valid

Reviewer 2: ...only for routing? Does this help with validation (the editor will know best).

MPS) for each combination of local and remote IP addresses.

If a QUIC endpoint determines that the PLPMTU between any pair of local and
remote IP addresses has fallen below the size needed to support the minimum QUIC
packet size (BASE_PLPMTU), it MUST immediately cease sending QUIC packets on the
affected path. An endpoint MAY terminate the connection if an alternative path
cannot be found.

### DPLPMTUD and Initial Connectivity

From the perspective of DPLPMTUD, QUIC transport is an acknowledged
packetization layer (PL). A sender can therefore enter the DPLPMTUD BASE state
when the QUIC connection handshake has been completed.

### Sending QUIC DPLPMTUD Probe Packets

DPLPMTU probe packets are ack-eliciting packets.  Probe packets that use the
PADDING frame implement "Probing using padding data", as defined in
Section 4.1 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.  Endpoints could limit the content of probe
packets to PING and PADDING frames as packets that are larger than the current
maximum packet size are more likely to be dropped by the network.

DPLPMTU probe packets consume congestion window, which could delay subsequent

> transmission by an application.

Reviewer 4: I think here is more to consider. QUIC's loss detection will trigger on a lost probe packet. Even tough this does not lead to a retransmission, since PING and PAD frames won't be retransmitted, one could misinterpret the loss as a congestion signal. It might worth to note that a lost probe packet should not be treated as a congestion signal by the congestion control.

Reviewer 2: Section 3, bullet 7 of DPLPMTUD clarifies this as: "Loss of a probe packet SHOULD NOT be treated as an indication of congestion and SHOULD NOT trigger a congestion control reaction". Maybe this could be added as clarification?

Author: Maybe one of you can make a suggestion for what this can say (or file an issue for follow-up).

Reviewer 4: Does this makes sense? (I merged both paragraphs in the section)

... Endpoints could limit the content of probe packets to PING and PADDING frames as packets that are larger than the current maximum packet size are more likely to be dropped by the network. These frames might not be retransmitted if a probe packet containing them is lost. Additionally, a lost probe packet should not be treated as a signal of congestion. However, these probe packets do consume congestion window, which could delay the transmission of subsequent application data.

Reviewer 2: Nearly, could we say:

Probe packets are larger than the current maximum packet size and therefore more likely to be dropped by the network. Endpoints could therefore limit the content of probe packets to ACK-eliciting frames that are not retransmitted (e.g., using PING and PADDING frames).  Loss of a probe packet SHOULD NOT be treated as an indication of congestion and SHOULD NOT trigger a congestion control reaction (see section 3, bullet 7 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.  However, probe packets do consume congestion window, which could delay subsequent transmission by an application.

## Datagram Packetization Layer PMTU Discovery

When implementing the algorithm in Section 5 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}, the initial value
of BASE_PMTU SHOULD be consistent with the minimum QUIC packet size. The
MIN_PLPMTU is the same as the BASE_PMTU.

> PMTU probe packets for DPLPMTUD that use the PADDING frame implement "Probing
> using padding data", as defined in Section 4.1 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PMTU probes for DPLPMTUD that use the PADDING frame implement "Probing
using padding data", as defined in Section 4.1 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.
```

affected path. An endpoint MAY terminate the connection if an alternative path
cannot be found.

### DPLPMTUD and Initial Connectivity

From the perspective of DPLPMTUD, QUIC transport is an acknowledged
packetization layer (PL). A sender can therefore enter the DPLPMTUD BASE state
when the QUIC connection handshake has been completed.

### Validating the QUIC Path with DPLPMTUD

QUIC provides an acknowledged PL, therefore a sender does not implement the
DPLPMTUD CONFIRMATION_TIMER while in the SEARCH_COMPLETE state; see Section
5.2 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.

### Handling of ICMP Messages by DPLPMTUD

An endpoint using DPLPMTUD requires the validation of any received ICMP Packet
Too Big (PTB) message before using the PTB information, as defined in Section
4.6 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.  In addition to UDP Port validation, QUIC validates an
ICMP message by using other PL information (e.g., validation of connection IDs
in the quoted packet of any received ICMP message).

The considerations for processing ICMP messages described in {{icmp-pmtud}} also
apply if these messages are used by DPLPMTUD.

## Sending QUIC PMTU Probe Packets

> PMTU probe packets are ack-eliciting packets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PMTU probes contain ack-eliciting packets.
```

> Endpoints could limit the content of probe packets to PING and PADDING frames as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Endpoints could limit the content of PMTU probes to PING and PADDING frames as
```

packets that are larger than the current maximum packet size are more likely to
be dropped by the network.   Loss of a QUIC packet that is carried in a PMTU

> probe packet is therefore not a reliable indication of congestion and SHOULD NOT

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
probe is therefore not a reliable indication of congestion and SHOULD NOT
```

trigger a congestion control reaction; see Section 3, Bullet 7 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.
However, PMTU probe packets consume congestion window, which could delay
subsequent transmission by an application.

## PMTU Probes Containing Source Connection ID {#pmtu-probes-src-cid}

Endpoints that rely on the destination connection ID for routing incoming QUIC
packets are likely to require that the connection ID be included in

> PMTU probe packets to route any resulting ICMP messages ({{icmp-pmtud}}) back to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PMTU probes to route any resulting ICMP messages ({{icmp-pmtud}}) back to
```

the correct endpoint.  However, only long header packets ({{long-header}})
contain the Source Connection ID field, and long header packets are not
decrypted or acknowledged by the peer once the handshake is complete.

> One way to construct a PMTU probe packet is to coalesce (see

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One way to construct a PMTU probe is to coalesce (see
```

{{packet-coalesce}}) a packet with a long header, such as a Handshake or 0-RTT
packet ({{long-header}}), with a short header packet in a single UDP datagram.

> If the resulting PMTU probe packet reaches the endpoint, the packet with the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the resulting PMTU probe reaches the endpoint, the packet with the
```

long header will be ignored, but the short header packet will be acknowledged.

> If the UDP datagram causes an ICMP message to be sent, the first part of the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the PMTU probe causes an ICMP message to be sent, the first part of the
```

> datagram will be quoted in that message.  If the Source Connection ID field is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
probe will be quoted in that message.  If the Source Connection ID field is
```

## Datagram Packetization Layer PMTU Discovery

When implementing the algorithm in Section 5 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}, the initial value
of BASE_PMTU SHOULD be consistent with the minimum QUIC packet size. The
MIN_PLPMTU is the same as the BASE_PMTU.

QUIC endpoints implementing DPLPMTUD maintain a maximum packet size (DPLPMTUD
MPS) for each combination of local and remote IP addresses.

If a QUIC endpoint determines that the PLPMTU between any pair of local and
remote IP addresses has fallen below the size needed to support the minimum QUIC
packet size (BASE_PLPMTU), it MUST immediately cease sending QUIC packets,

> except for DPLPMTUD probe packets, on the affected path. An endpoint MAY

Reviewer 2: I am fine to remove: DPLPMTUD will anyway send some "probes" after it thinks a blackhole is detected, to confirm if the black hole exists. Once confirmed I understand QUIC will cease sending.

terminate the connection if an alternative path cannot be found.

### DPLPMTUD and Initial Connectivity

From the perspective of DPLPMTUD, QUIC transport is an acknowledged
packetization layer (PL). A sender can therefore enter the DPLPMTUD BASE state
when the QUIC connection handshake has been completed and the endpoint has
established a 1-RTT key.

### Sending QUIC DPLPMTUD Probe Packets

> DPLPMTU probe packets are ack-eliciting packets.  Probe packets that use the

Reviewer 3: This sounds like we are using a term without defining it. Perhaps "DPLPMTU probe packets require acknowledgements (Section 3 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}), and are therefore ack-eliciting packets"?

Reviewer 2: Works for me.

> PADDING frame therefore implement "Probing using padding data", as defined in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PADDING frame implement "Probing using padding data", as defined in
```

Section 4.1 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.  Endpoints could limit the content of probe
packets to PING and PADDING frames as packets that are larger than the current
maximum packet size are more likely to be dropped by the network.

DPLPMTU probe packets consume congestion window, which could delay subsequent
transmission by an application.

### Validating the QUIC Path with DPLPMTUD

QUIC provides an acknowledged PL, therefore a sender does not implement the

> DPLPMTUD CONFIRMATION_TIMER while in the SEARCH_COMPLETE state.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
DPLPMTUD CONFIRMATION_TIMER while in the SEARCH_COMPLETE state; see Section
5.2 of {{!DPLPMTUD}}.
```
